{\rtf1\ansi \deff0 \adeflang1033 {\fonttbl {\f0\froman Times New Roman;}
{\f1\froman Arial;}{\f2\fmodern MS LineDraw;}{\f3\fdecor Symbol;}}
{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue127;\red0\green127\blue0;\red0\green127\blue127;\red127\green0\blue0;\red127\green0\blue127;\red127\green127\blue0;\red127\green127\blue127;\red192\green192\blue192;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red0\green255\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;}\linex0 \sbknone 
\paperh12240 \paperw15840 \margl1080 \margr1080 \margt720 \margb720 \plain \lang1033 \lndscpsxn \fs22 \f0 \linex0 \linemod0 \sbknone \lndscpsxn \pard \qj thousand, and West Virginia, ten \fs22 \f0 \b thousand, \_a total of \fs22 \f0 \plain \fs22 \lang1033 ,one hundred and twenty thousand men. The governors :of these States re \_ echoed the call, but still the responses were weak. The uniformed and disciplined regiments of New York City generally responded and proceeded to Harrisburg, but the number from the other States, including Pennsylvania, who went to meet the foe was but comparatively small. A liberal estimate of the number who responded was \_about as follows: Pennsylvania, twentyfive thousand; New York, fifteen thousand; New Jersey, three thousand; Maryland, five thousand; Delaware, two thousand,\_ a total of fifty thousand. Those of the number who reported at Harrisburg were organized into two divisions, one under General W. F. Smith, and the other ,under General DaDa. On the same day that the President. ,called for troops, the construction of breast\_works and the digging of rifle pits along the river front, and on the opposite bank of the river, were commenced and carried forward from day to day. At the same time these preparations were being made at Harrisburg, similar activity was manifested at Pittsburg. Thus while the work of preparation for the reception of the enemy was going on, he was pressing toward our border, and soon, as we will show, ,made his appearance in our midst.\par 
\pard \par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs22 \f0 \pard \qj \fi210 \tx210 The people who lived along the southern border during the war were kept in an almost continuous state of anxiety. The boomina of cannon was frequently heard, and the rumors of approaching foes at times threw the whole community into a state of intense excitement. Dr. Philip Schaff, in his notes on Matthew xxiv. 6, as pubJished in Lange's commentary, in a lucid and \fs22 \f0 \b graphic\par 
\pard \tx210 \par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs22 \f0 \pard \qj manner \fs22 \f0 \plain \fs22 \lang1033 describes the excitement which prevailed along the border during the week preceding the appearance of the invading army. The doctor, whose ability as a scholar and writer is \_widely known, resided in Mercersburg, Franklin county, at the time of the war, and the scripture upon which his comments are based is as follows: \fs22 \f0 \i \_,'And ye shall hear of wars and rumors of wars." \fs22 \f0 \plain \fs22 \lang1033 The doctor says: \fs12 \f1 11 \fs22 \f0 1 beg leave to quote a passage from my diary during the famous Southern invasion of Pennsylvania under General Lee, in June and July, 1863, which may throw some light oil this passage (Alattbew xxiv: 6.) in its wider application to different periods of repeated fulfillment:\par 
\pard \par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs22 \f0 \fs16 \f0 \i \pard \qj \fi210 \tx210 'Mercersburg, Pa., june iSlh, rS63. \fs16 \f0 \plain \fs16 \lang1033 \_It seems to me that I now understand better than ever before some passages in the prophetic dis6ourses of our Savior, especially the difference between \fs16 \f0 \i wars \fs16 \f0 \plain \fs16 \lang1033 and \fs16 \f0 \i rumors of wars, \fs16 \f0 \plain \fs16 \lang1033 and especially the force of the command to \fs16 \f0 \i "flee lo 1,'ie mountains, " (v. \fs12 \f1 \plain \fs12 \f1 \lang1033 16) \fs16 \f0 which I hear again and again in these days from the mouth of the poor negroes and other fugitives. Rumors of wars, \fs10 \f1 Ls \fs16 \f0 distin& from \fs16 \f0 \i wars \fs16 \f0 \plain \fs16 \lang1033 are not, as usually understood, reports of wars in foreign or distant countries, for these may be read or heard of with perfect composure and unconcern, but the confli6ting, confused, exaggerated and frightful rumors which precede the approach of war to. our own \fs16 \f0 \i homes \fs16 \f0 \plain \fs16 \lang1033 and \fs22 \f0 ft \fs16 \f0 \i resides, \fs16 \f0 \plain \fs16 \lang1033 especially by the advance of an invading army and the consequent panic and commotion of the people, the suspension of business, the confusion of families, the apprehensions of women and children, the preparations for flight, the fear of plunder, capture and the worst outrages which the unbridled passions of brute soldiers are thought capable of committing upon an unarmed community. Such \fs16 \f0 \i rumors of wars \fs16 \f0 \plain \fs16 \lang1033 are a&ually often worse than war itself, and hence they are mentioned after the \fs16 \f0 \i wars \fs16 \f0 \plain \fs16 \lang1033 by way of climax. The present state of things in this community is certainly worse than the rebel raid of General Stuart's cavalry in O&ober last, when they suddenly at Mercersburg, at noon\_day, seized a large number of horses, shoes and store goods, and twelve innocent citizens as candidates for Libby prison, but did no further harm and left after a few hours for Chambersburg. But now the \_whole veteran army of Lee, the military strength and flower of the South\par 
\page \lndscpsxn \fs21 \f0 \sect \sectd \linex0 \linemod0 \sbknone \lndscpsxn \pard \tx1828 \tqr \tx4033 96\tab \fs16 \f1 THE GREAT INVASION.\par 
\pard \tx1828 \tqr \tx4033 \par 
\fs16 \f1 \pard \tqr \tx5723 ern rebellion is said to be crossing the Potomac and marching into Penn\-\par 
\pard \tqr \tx5723 sylvania. We are cut off from all mail communication and dependent on\par 
\pard \tqr \tx5723 the flying and contradi&ory rumors of passengers, straggling soldiers, run\-\par 
\pard \tqr \tx5723 away negroes and spies. All the schools and stores are closed; goods are\par 
\pard \tqr \tx5723 being hid or removed to the country, valuables buried in cellars or gardens\par 
\pard \tqr \tx5723 and other places of concealment; the poor negroes, the , innocent cause of\par 
\pard \tqr \tx5723 the war, are trembling like leaves and flying with their little bundles " to\par 
\pard \tqr \tx5723 the mountains," especially, the numerous run\_away slaves from Virginia,\par 
\pard \tqr \tx5723 from fear of being captured as " contrabands \fs8 \f0 \i 11 \fs16 \f1 \plain \fs16 \f1 \lang1033 and sold to the South; politi\-\par 
\pard \tqr \tx5723 cal passions run high; confidence is destroyed; innocent persons are siezed\par 
\pard \tqr \tx5723 as spies; the neighbor looks upon his neighbor with suspicion, and even\par 
\pard \tqr \tx5723 sensible ladies have their imagination excited with pi6tures of horrors far\par 
\pard \tqr \tx5723 worse than death. This is a most intolerable state of things, and it would\par 
\pard \tqr \tx5723 be a positive relief of the most painful suspense if the rebel army would\par 
\pard \tqr \tx5723 march into town.'\par 
\pard \tqr \tx5723 \par 
\fs21 \f0 \fs10 \f0 \pard \qj \fi212 \tx212 11 \fs21 \f0 Shortly after the above was written," adds Dr. Schaff", "various detachments of Lee's army took and kept pos\-session of Mercersburg till the terrible battles at Gettys\-burg on the first three days of July, and although public and private houses were ransacked, horses, cows, sheep, and provisions stolen day by day without mercy, negroes captured and carried back into slavery, (even such as I know to have been born and raised on free soil,) and many other outrages committed by the lawless guerrilla bands of McNeil, Imboden, Mosby, etc., yet the actual reign of terror, bad as it was, did not after all come up to the pre\-vious apprehensions created by the \fs10 \f0 I \fs21 \f0 wars and rumors of wars', and the community became more calm and com\-posed, brave and unmindful of danger."\par 
\fs21 \f0 \pard \qj \fi212 \tx212 Rumors of the threatened invasion of our border became prevalent in Chambersburg toward the latter part of the\par 
\fs8 \f0 \i \pard \li2492 \tx2492 \tqr \tx2946 ID\par 
\fs21 \f0 \plain \fs21 \lang1033 \pard \qc \tqr \tx5690 week previous to the actual appearance of the enemy.\par 
\pard \qc \tqr \tx5690 On the evening of Saturday, June 13th, the town was\par 
\pard \qc \tqr \tx5690 thrown into a state of great excitement by a rumor that\par 
\pard \tqr \tx5690 \par 
\fs16 \f1 \pard REMOVAL OF VALVABLES.\par 
\pard \par 
\fs21 \f0 \b \pard \tqr \tx354 97\par 
\pard \tqr \tx354 \par 
\fs21 \f0 \pard \qj the foe was approaching; and towards evening \fs21 \f0 \plain \fs21 \lang1033 of the fol\-lowing day (Sunday, 14th), the report was in circulation that dismter had fallen upon the Federal forces about Winchester, and the enemy were approaching in force. Immediately, as upon former occasions, when news of the approach of the Confederates was received, great excite\-ment and confusion ensued. The usual work of secreting, or packing and sending away, merchandise and other valuables was commenced. The stores and shops were opened, and all was activity in removing their contents. The firm, of which the writer was a member, boxed and shipped part of its stock of dry goods to Philadelphia, some to the country to be hid in farm \_houses, and the larger part was secreted in a fire \_proof beer vault under an adjoining building. The officers of the bank removed their valuables, and the officials of the court \_house packed and sent awaj, the records and other valuable papers be\-longing to the county. The railroad men were also prompt to meet the emergency, and by noon of the ensuing day, Monday, 15th, bad all their portable property loaded on cars and ready for shipment.\par 
\fs21 \f0 \pard \qj \fi212 \tx212 As events of stirring\_, interest are now to be narrated, I will resume the daily summary style, and will commence with\_\par 
\fs21 \f0 \fs22 \f0 \i \pard \qj \fi212 \tx212 Nonday, June \fs21 \f0 \plain \fs21 \lang1033 15. Oil this day we witnessed the great\-est excitement which had occurred up to that time during all the history of the war. Early in the morning farmers residing in the southern portion of our county, began to pass through the town and on down the Harrisburg pike with their stock and valuables. The road \fs21 \f0 \b was crowded with \fs21 \f0 \plain \fs21 \lang1033 wagons, horses and cattle. \fs21 \f0 \b Then came large numbers \fs16 \f1 \plain \fs16 \f1 \lang1033 7\par 
\page \lndscpsxn \fs21 \f0 \sect \sectd \linex0 \linemod0 \sbknone \lndscpsxn \pard \qj of colored persons, men, women, and children, bearing with them huge bundles of clothing, bedding, and articles of house\_keeping. Many of these had come from the val\-ley of Virginia, while a few were residents of our own county and the neighboring county of Washington, in Maryland. About ten o'clock forty or fifty wagons, drawn by horses and mules, came dashing down Main street. They were attended by a few cavalry, and the affrighted drivers were lashing the poor jaded brutes attached to the wagons. They declared that the enemy were in close pur\-suit; that a large part of the train bad been captured, and that the dreaded foe was about to enter Chambersburg. These wagons were a part of Colonel McReynolds' train, which Jenkins' cavalry bad pursued from Berryville, and across the Potornac at Williamsport the afternoon before. As they canie dashing down our street, drivers alternately lashing the poor animals and looking back to see if the enemy were in sight, the scenes of terror and confusion were perfectly terrific. Near the corner of Main and Queen streets one of the horses dropped dead from ex\-haustion. It was said that all along the road froin the Potomac to this place wrecked wagons and broken down horses and mules were left by the way. When passing through the public square of this place at bead\_long speed, Lieutenant Palmer, on provost duty here, observing the needless panic, drew his revolver and ordered the teamsters to halt. His order was obeyed, and from Chain\-bersburg down to Carlisle the teams were driven at a moderate pace. At that place they were taken in hand by the military authorities, and subsequently removed beyond the Susquehanna. This panic, after the teams had passed\par 
\pard \par 
\fs21 \f0 \pard \qj through Hagerstown, was wholly unnecessary, as the in\-vaders were not within twenty miles of them, for about the time they reached this place Jenkins entered Hagerstown. Between this force of the enemy and the wagon \_ train was Company C, First New York Cavalry, 'under Captain \_Boyd. This gallant command \fs21 \f1 of \fs21 \f0 about forty men became separated from its regiment, part of which escaped west\-wardly with part of General Milroy's forces, and crossed the Potomac at Hancock and concentrated at Bloody Run \_ sometimes called Everett. These troops afterward did good service upon, the enemy's flank during the invasion, and this company under Captain Boyd, as well as com\-pany A under Captain Jones, will be heard from hereaf\-ter in this narrative.\par 
\fs21 \f0 \pard \qj \fi241 \tx241 The arrival of this train and the information it brought of the approach of the foe, naturally gave a fresh impetus \_to the citizens of Chambersburg, and the rush f~orn the \_town in the direction of Harrisburg assumed larger pro\-portions, while those who remained at their homes\_by much the larger number\_waited in much suspense for the arrival of the enemy.\par 
\fs21 \f0 \pard \qj \fi241 \tx241 At an early hour in the evening of this day, information was received of the approach of Jenkins' troops, and about eleven o'clock at night they reached the southern end of the town. Some six or eight were sent forward into the town to reconnoiter, and about two hundred more were detailed to make a rapid charge after this small force, and these were soon followed by the balance of the command \_about two thousand in all.\par 
\fs21 \f0 \pard \qj \fi241 \tx241 Seated at an open window in the second story of my resi\-~dence, overlooking the public square, and listening for the\par 
\page \lndscpsxn \fs8 \f0 \sect \sectd \linex0 \linemod0 \sbknone \lndscpsxn \pard \li1942 \tx1942 \tx5331 \tqr \tx5810 oM. \fs8 \f1 \b DRAIND S \fs15 \f0 ESCAPE.\tab \fs22 \f0 101\par 
\pard \tx1942 \tx5331 \tqr \tx5810 \par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs22 \f0 \pard \qj hundred detailed \fs22 \f0 \plain \fs22 \lang1033 to follow the reconnoitering party, came thundering down the street, followed after a short interval by the remainder of the command. Some few remained in the town, but the larger part passed on down and out by the Harrisburg pike, and after picketing the various\par 
\pard \par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs22 \f0 \pard \qj roads, encamped about one mile out. General Jenkins, with his staff, went to the residence of Colonel A. K. McClure, which stood upon the place where Wilson Fe\_\par 
\pard \par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs22 \f0 \pard \qj male College now stands, \_the fine building which stood there at that time having been burned \fs19 \f0 in \fs22 \f0 the destruction\par 
\pard \par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs22 \f0 \pard \qj of our town by McCausland a year afterward. After par\-taking of a bountiful supper prepared for them, the honors of the table being royally done by the colonel's accom\_\par 
\pard \par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs22 \f0 \pard \qj plished wife\_tile colonel himself being prudently absent \_lay down to rest for the night. Leaving Jenkins and his staff so comfortably quartered for the night in Mr.\par 
\pard \par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs22 \f0 \pard \qj McClure's mansion, and their horses picketed in his clover fields, we will return to town and detail what occurred there during the entrance of the reconnoitering party.\par 
\pard \par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs22 \f0 \pard \qj \fi215 \tx215 As the scouts came galloping down Main street, with their carbines cocked and levelled, the darkness prevented\par 
\pard \tx215 \par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs22 \f0 \pard \qj them from seeing a mortar\_bed and some piles of stone and sand in front of Mr. 1\_1. M. White's residence then i\par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs22 \f0 \pard \tqr \tx5562 \tqr \tx5778 \tab in\par 
\pard \tqr \tx5562 \tqr \tx5778 \tab process of building, and one of the horses stumbled and\par 
\pard \tqr \tx5562 \tqr \tx5778 \par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs22 \f0 \pard \qj fell,throwing its rider headlong into the mortar \_bed. The fall caused his carbine to go off, and he, as well as his comrades, supposed that a citizen had fired upon t*m. Simultaneously with the report of tile carbine, Mr. J. S.\par 
\pard \par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs22 \f0 \pard \qj Brand, then residing in a house near by, threw open the shutters of a second story window in his house to see what was transpiring in the street. A cavalryman, \fs22 \f0 \b then\par 
\pard \par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs22 \f0 \pard \qj approaching enemy, I \fs22 \f0 \plain \fs22 \lang1033 at length heard the clatter of horsei? feet coming rapidly down Main Street. When opposite the residence of Mr. H. M. White \_but a short distance from the public square\_the report of a gun was beard. Almost simultaneously with the report of this gun, some four or five cavalrymen rode into the square. In the darkness\_the gas in front of the bank building only having been left burning\_they became separated, and one of them, evidently the officer in command of tbi squad, who had ridden over near the batik, called out in a peculiarly southern tone, \fs21 \f0 \i "Hawkins! Ilawkinsil I \fs22 \f0 \plain \fs22 \lang1033 say, \fs21 \f0 \i Hawkins, w\fs22 \f0 \plain \fs22 \lang1033 bar in the \_ are you? " If Lieutenant Smith \_for such was his name, as will appear shortly \_had called upon two of our gallant young men, John A. Seiders and T. M. Mahon, instead of his Satanic majesty, he might have received tile information he so earnestly desired, for they were having a little matter of business with his friend \fs8 \f0 11 \fs21 \f0 \i ITawkins " across \fs22 \f0 \plain \fs22 \lang1033 the square and near the court \_house at that time. But Lieutenant Smith's anxiety for his friend was soon relieved, for on his going across the square to ascertain what had become of him, he fell into the hands of S\_eiders, and soon thereafter joined the object of his solicitude, both of them, however, dismounted and disarmed. Following this call for his absent comrade, the officer again called out, \fs10 \f0 11 \fs22 \f0 Whar's the inayaw of this town? I say, whar's the rnayaw of this town? If the mayaw dots not come here in five minutes we will burn the town!" The "Mayaw" not responding to this urgent call, the officer rode across the square to the front of the court\_house, where he was captured by Seiders. In a short time after the capture of Lieutenant Smith, the two\par 
\page \lndscpsxn \fs22 \f0 \sect \sectd \linex0 \linemod0 \sbknone \lndscpsxn \pard \qj opposite this house, hearing the report of the gun and. \fs22 \f1 \b the opening of the \fs22 \f0 \plain \fs22 \lang1033 shutters, cried out that the shot came. from that window. In a short time, after the arrival of the other cavalrymen, a number of them, piloted by the one who averred that the shot came from Mr. Brand's house, went to the place and knocked at the door demand\-ing admittance, and declaring the purpose of banging the. man that fired the shot. Mrs. Brand, becoming greatly alarmed for her husband's safety, urged him to go up into the attic and hide himself. At length, to gratify his wife, Mr. Brand complied, but finding his hiding \_place under the roof to be very warm, and concluding that if the house\-was searched and he was found secreted, their suspicions. would be confirmed, he came forth determined to face the, issue. But as the cavalrymen were yet at the door clam\-oring for entrance and threatening to break it in, he at length at the urgent solicitude of his wife, went into his\-back yard and crept into a bake \_oven and drew to its iron door. But if the attic was warm, the oven was hot, for it. had been used that same day to bake broad. After shift\-ing himself from one hand and knee to the other until he could endure it no lon(yer, he once more came forth to brave the foe. Before it was quite daylight a member of Mr. John Jeffries' family, who lived adjoining, came over to Mr. Brand's and said that the rebels were all about the. house \_waiting for daylight, and declaring their purpose to. seaWh it and bang the person found in it. These ladies,, Mrs. Brand and Miss Jeffries, then hit upon the expedient of disguising Mr. Brand and having him leave the house\-Accordingly, they arrayed him in one of Mrs. Brand's dresses, and a large flowing sun\_bonuet was put on his,\par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs22 \f0 \fs9 \f0 \pard \li1808 \tx1808 \tx2705 \tqr \tx3105 0\tab \fs13 \f0 n\par 
\pard \tx1808 \tx2705 \tqr \tx3105 \par 
\fs22 \f0 \pard \qj head to hide his beard. In this disguise Mr. Brand went out of his back door, passed up his lot in the presence of the enemy, and crossed over to the residence of Mr. Jeffries where he was disrobed and where he had no further trouble with the enemy. The situation of Mr. Brand was an alarming one, and he availed himself of the only means of escape which presented itself; and for this he was indebted to the ingenuity of women.\par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs22 \f0 \pard \qj \fi226 \tx226 Shortly after the entrance of the advance guard into the public square, one of the cavalry \_men rode up to John A. Seiders and T. M. Mahon, as they stood upon the court\-house pavement, and inquired of them in what direction the remainder of the squad had gone? These two men had just returned home from service in the army, and they determined to try their hands on that fellow. Neither of them were armed, but Mahon, using a piece of a plaster\-ing lath which he held in his hand as a sword, seized hold of one of the reins of the bridle, and Seiders the other, and quietly demanded his surrender. He at once dis\-mounted, and his sabre and pistol \_the other being taken by Seiders \_were at once taken by Mahon, who quickly mounted the horse and rode rapidly out Market street to Third, up Third to Queen, and down Queen to the market\-house, into which he entered. While there a party of cav\-alry \_men rode down Second street toward Market, and Mahon, as soon as they had passed, started out east Queen at a rapid gait. Near the eastern point, at the junction of Queen and Washinoton streets he encountered a squad who called upon him to halt, but he fled on out the Gettysburg pike towards Fayetteville. At Downey's, some four miles distant, he turned from the pike and pro\-\par 
\page \lndscpsxn \fs22 \f0 \sect \sectd \linex0 \linemod0 \sbknone \lndscpsxn \pard \qj ceeded to Scotland, where, on the next day, he gave the horse into the care of a friend, and after witnessing the destruction of the railroad \_ bridge at that place, he eluded the pickets and returned on foot to Chambersburgr and reported the destruction of the bridge to the railroad officials. Finding, however, that the Confederates had secured his name, and were on the built of him, he, after having been for some time hid in the house of his law preceptor, William McClellan, Esq., left and sought refuge in safer quarters. Mr. Mahon, to whom I am indebted for this account, desires to present his compliments to Mr. George Hawkins, should lie be yet living and see this statement, and to assure him that tile saddle, carbine, and case of medicines, borrowed of him under such pressing circumstances, have been safely kept, and he will be happy to return them to him now that \fs10 \f1 11 \fs22 \f0 this cruel war is over."\par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs22 \f0 \pard \qj \fi208 \tx208 Immediately after the departure of Mahon with his prize \_the Confederate having been handed over to several other persons who came upon the scene, and who started to conduct him to the jail, but released him when they found that they were likely to be caught, \_ another cav\-alry\_nian rode up to where Seiders was standing, and inquired what had become of bis couirade, Hawkins. Seiders now being armed with one of the captured pistols, presented it and demanded his surrender. To this demand be at once complied and dismounted. Seiders quickly disarmed him, and taking his sabre, pistols, and spurs, mounted his horse and rode rapidly out cast Market street. At Market and Second streets lie encountered the head of the column which had passed the market \_ house while Mahon was in it. To their command to halt he \fs22 \f0 \b paid no\par 
\pard \tx208 \par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs22 \f0 \pard \qj attention, but put his captured animal upon its speed and \fs22 \f0 \plain \fs22 \lang1033 galloped out to Fayetteville. Arriving at that place he took an inventory of his capture, and it was found to be as follows: A valuable horse, saddle, bridle, four blankets rolled up and fastened behind the saddle, two fine pistols, sabre and belt, and a pair of saddle\_bags, containing a dress coat, two shirts, a Testament, a pack of cards, a package of love letters, some smoking tobacco and other articles. Mr. Seiders also desires to present his compli\-riaents to Lieutenant Smith, and to assure him that he would be delighted once more to meet him, and return to him whatever of these articles lie has preserved. From Fayetteville Mr. Seiders proceeded down through Cum\-berland county to Harrisburg, and dressed inthe captured Confederate uniform, and mounted upon his captured horse, he did excellent scouting service during the invasion.\par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs22 \f0 \pard \qj \fi247 \tx247 I return now from this extended but interesting digres\-sion to our main narrative, and will detail the events of \_\par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs22 \f0 \fs22 \f0 \i \pard \qj \fi247 \tx247 Tuesday, June 16. \fs22 \f0 \plain \fs22 \lang1033 Early this morning the Confederates took possession of what is known as Shirk's or Gelsinger's hill. This is a commanding eminence about four miles north of Chambersburg, and oil the road leading to Har\_\par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs22 \f0 \fs5 \f0 \pard \li2178 \tx2178 \tx4625 \tqr \tx5025 In \tab \fs10 \f1 0\par 
\fs22 \f0 \pard \tqr \tx5624 risburg. A line of battle was formed along the brow of\par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs22 \f0 \fs10 \f1 \pard \li4182 \tx4182 \tqr \tx4587 Zn\par 
\fs22 \f0 \pard \qj this hill by a part of the Confederate force, while detach\-ments were sent out iii all directions for the purpose of plundering. General Jenkiiis and staff, after spending the night under the hospitable roof of Colonel McClure, came early in the day into Chambersburg and established his\par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs22 \f0 \fs10 \f1 \pard \li3462 \tx3462 Z:)\par 
\fs22 \f0 \pard bead \_ quarters at the Montgomery House. One of his first acts was to summon the burgess and town \_ council to his head \_ quarters, when he made a demand for the return\par 
\page \lndscpsxn \fs22 \f0 \b \sect \sectd \linex0 \linemod0 \sbknone \lndscpsxn \pard \qj of the two \fs22 \f1 \plain \fs22 \f1 \lang1033 horses and equipments taken, and in case of their not being returned, payment for them, and in default of either, he threatened the destruction of the town ' . As the captured property was beyond the reach of the coun\-cil, the matter was adjusted by the payment of $900, and the banding over to him of the same number of pistoN taken. For these be would not receive compensation in money, as he said pistols were of more value to them than money. After a little search the council secured by purchase from some of our citizens the number of pistols wanted, and the $900 were paid over to him in Confederate scrip. Doubtless he expected to receive United States currency; but as his soldiers had flooded the town with their worthless currency, pronouncing it better than green\-backs, the city fathers took him at his word and paid him in his own money. This was bought up of our business ,men at about five cents on the dollar. Seiders afterward sold the horse for $175, and the saddle for $35. Out of this amount he refunded what the transaction cost the council ($75), and he bad $135 left.\par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs22 \f1 \pard \qj \fi213 \tx213 General Jenkins also issued an order requiring all arms in possession of our citizens, whether public or private, to be brought to the front of the court\_house within two hours; and in case of disobedience all houses were to be searched, and those in which arms were found should be lawful objects of plunder. The pretext for this humili\-atiDg order was that his troops bad been fired on by a citizen the night before. Many complied with this requisi\-tion, and a considerable number of guns, good, bad, and indifferent, were carried to the appointed place, where a conimittee of our people were ordered to take down the\par 
\pard \tx213 \par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs22 \f1 \pard \qj name of each person who brought a gun. This was to secure the houses of all who complied with the order from, the threatened search. Some, of course, did not comply, but enough did to satisfy the enemy, and a general search was avoided. Captain Fitzhugh, Jenkins' chief of staT, an ill\_natured man\_the same person who figured so largely in the burning of the town a year afterward\_as\-sorted the guns as they were brought in, retaining those that could be used by their men, and twisting out of shape, or breaking over the stone steps of the court \_house, such as were unfit for service.\par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs22 \f1 \pard \qj \fi213 \tx213 During the whole of this day foraging parties were sent out to all parts of the surrounding country, gathering, horses and cattle, of which large numbers were taken and sent south to Williamsport and banded over to Rodes' infantry. One of these plundering parties on this day visited the Caledonia Iron Works, situated about ten miles cast of Chambersburg, at the foot of the South Mountain, and belongiu\_ to TIon. Thaddeus Stevens. Under the promise that if all the horses and mules belong\-ing to the establishment were delivered to them the iron works would not be burned, about forty valuable animals with harness, etc., were carried away. Mr. Stevens came near being captured by this party. He was on a visit to that place, and upon the rumored approach of the Con\-federates, was hurried away to Shippeilsburg by a by\-road, much against his will and earnest protest. A week later, as will be shown in its appropriate place, these iron works were fired by the enemy and wholly consumed.\par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs22 \f1 \pard \qj \fi213 \tx213 One of the revolting features of this day was the scour\-ing of the fields about the town and searching of houses\par 
\page \lndscpsxn \fs22 \f0 \sect \sectd \linex0 \linemod0 \sbknone \lndscpsxn \pard \qj in \fs22 \f1 \b portions of the \fs22 \f0 \plain \fs22 \lang1033 place for negroes. These poor creatures \_those of them who had not fled upon the approach of the foe \_sought concealment in the growing wheat fields about the town. Into these the cavalrymen rode in search of their prey, and many were caught \_ some after a desper\-ate chase and being fired at. In two cases, through the intercession of a friend who had influence with Jenkins, I succeeded in effecting the release of the captured persons. That this practice of the raid was not confined to the vicinity of Chambersburg alone, but was practiced else\-where, is proven by the quotation from Rev. Dr. Schaff's diary previously given in which he said that colored per\-sons were taken and sent into southern slavery, even \fs10 \f0 11 \fs22 \f0 such as I [he] knew to have been born and raised on free soil.." In some cases these negroes were rescued from the guards,w ho were conducting them South, by the indig\-nant people. A case of this kind occurred in Greencastle, in which a few determined men, armed with revolvers, captured a s(piad w1iich had in charge a number of these poor frightened creatures, and releascd them from the un\-happy fate which threatened them. This feature of the war indicated the object for which it was waged, to estab\-lish aigovernment founded upon human slavery. Thank God, the effort, as well as the iniquitous cause which in\-spired it, not only failed, but went down never again to be attempted in this age or country. That slavery was the corner\_stone ul)on which the government, sought to be \fs16 \f0 n\par 
\fs22 \f0 \pard \tqr \tx5687 established by the South, was to rest, is proved by the\par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs22 \f0 \pard admission of one of the principal persons in the effort.*\par 
\pard \par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs22 \f0 \fs16 \f0 \pard \qj \fi150 \tx150 '~cHon. A. H. Stephens, in what is called his "Corner Stone" address, delivered at Savannah, Georgia, March \fs10 \f0 21, \fs16 \f0 1861. That part of this address which relates to slavery will be found in Appendix A.\par 
\pard \tx150 \par 
\fs22 \f0 \pard \qj \fi214 \tx214 But that all who participated in the war against the Federal government, either did not entertain the same view as that held by the leaders in the movement, or else changed their minds during the progress of the war, is evident in the following thrilling sentiment, uttered by Mr. Maurice Thompson, a Southern man.*\par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs22 \f0 \fs16 \f0 \pard \li1946 \tx1946 \tqr \tx3791 "I am a Southerner;\par 
\fs16 \f0 \pard \qj \li1201 \tx1201 I love the South; I dared for her To fight from Lookout to the sea, With her proud banner over me: But from my lips thanksgiving broke, As God in battle thunder spoke,\par 
\fs16 \f0 \pard \qj \li1201 \tx1201 And that Black Idol, breeding drouth And dearth of human sympathy\par 
\fs16 \f0 \pard \qj \li1210 \tx1210 Throughout the sweet and sensuous South Was, with its chains and human yoke,\par 
\fs16 \f0 \pard \li1239 \tx1239 \tqr \tx4672 Blown hellward from the cannon's mouth,\par 
\fs16 \f0 \pard \li1223 \tx1223 While Freedom cheered behind the smoke."\par 
\pard \tx1223 \par 
\fs22 \f0 \fs22 \f0 \i \pard \qj \li56 \fi242 \tx56 \tx298 Wednesday, June 17. \fs22 \f0 \plain \fs22 \lang1033 About eight o'clock this morning General Jenkins ordered the stores and shops to be opened\par 
\pard \tx56 \tx298 \par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs22 \f0 \pard \qj \li54 \tx54 for two hours, and that his men should be permitted to purchase such articles as they personally needed, but in all\par 
\pard \tx54 \par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs22 \f0 \pard \qj \li54 \tx54 cases must pay for what they got. Business accordingly went on very briskly for awhile with those who had not removed or secreted their entire stock. Fortunately for us and many others, but little was found in our stores; but what little we had which the soldiers could buy under the order was quickly bougbt up and paid for in all imagina\_\par 
\pard \tx54 \par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs22 \f0 \pard \qj \li54 \tx54 ble kinds of scrip. Not only Confederate notes were paid us, but sbin \_ plasters issued by the city of Richmond and\par 
\pard \tx54 \par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs22 \f0 \pard \qj \li54 \tx54 other southern corporations. While this traffic was in operation a Confederate soldier seized a number of rem\-nants of ladies' dress goods, which we had left lie on the\par 
\pard \tx54 \par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs22 \f0 \fs17 \f0 \i \b \pard \li249 \tx249 *This \fs16 \f0 \plain \b \fs16 \lang1033 \plain \fs16 \lang1033 beautiful poem will be found in Appendix B.\par 
\page \lndscpsxn \fs21 \f0 \sect \sectd \linex0 \linemod0 \sbknone \lndscpsxn \pard \qj counter, not thinking them worth hiding, and putting them under his arm walked out and down past Jenkins' head \_ quarters. The General came quickly out and caught the fellow by the back of the neck and ran him back into the store on the double \_quick, saying to us as he rushed him up to the counter, \fs11 \f1 11 \fs21 \f0 Did this man get these here? and ,did he pay for them?" Upon being told that he had taken them and had not paid , for them, the General drew his sword, and flourishing it above the man's head and swear\-ing terribly, said, "I've a mind to cut your head off."\par 
\pard \par 
\fs21 \f0 \pard \li1184 \tx1184 \tx2848 \tqr \tx5703 9\tab \fs11 \f1 11 \fs21 \f0 Sell my men all the goods\par 
\fs21 \f0 \pard \tx5037 \tqr \tx5689 Then turnin to us he said,\tab \fs14 \f0 r)\par 
\fs21 \f0 \pard \tx5037 \tqr \tx5689 they want; but if any one attempts to take anything with\-\par 
\pard \tx5037 \tqr \tx5689 out paying for it, report to me at my head \_ quarters. We\par 
\pard \tx5037 \tqr \tx5689 \_are not thieves.)' Some of the officers visited the drug\par 
\pard \tx5037 \tqr \tx5689 stores of the town and made liberal purchases, telling the\par 
\pard \tx5037 \tqr \tx5689 proprietors to make out their bills, or if they had not time\par 
\pard \tx5037 \tqr \tx5689 to do so to guess at the amount and it would be paid.\par 
\fs21 \f0 \pard \qj \fi210 \tx210 About nine o'clock, while we were doing a lively busi\-ness, a soldier came riding at great speed from where the main body \_,verc stationed out oil the Harrisburg pike, and reported to Jenkins that the Yankees were coming. The general came out in great haste, and mounting his horse, and in a voice of great power, ordered the men to the front. A rush was made out the Harrisburg pike, and soon the town was free from the enemy, when we at once closed our places of business. In the course of an hour a number of men returned leading the horses, and went on down the road leading to Greencastle to the outskirts of the town and there waited. Jelikiiis had dismounted his men and was prepared to fight the expected Yankees as infantry. They were armed with Enfield rifles a~ well as sabres. In the course of about an hour afterward, these dismounted\par 
\pard \tx210 \par 
\fs21 \f0 \pard \qj men fell back and marched through the town and out to where their horses were, and, after remounting, continued to fall back to the vicinity of Greencastle. The news of the occupation of our town by the Confederates was known all over the country, and great numbers of people, as well as some Federal scouts, moved by curiosity, or a desire to ascertain precisely where the enemy were, had come within sight of the men in line of battle on Shirk's Hill. Seeing these, and bearing of the gathering of troops at Harris\-burg, and that a large body was advaneing, they were\par 
\fs11 \f1 \pard \li2136 \tx2136 \tx4363 \tqr \tx4763 C) \tab Zn\par 
\fs21 \f0 \pard \qj alarmed, and, supposing themselves to be in danger of being attacked in overwhelming numbers, or flanked and cut off, they fell back within supporting distance of the Confed\-erate infantry at Williamsport. A&Jelikins and his staff rode up street after the dismounted men had all passed nearly out of sight, a number of our citizLs were standing upon the pavement in front of the court \_house. Suppos\-ing that they might be armed and intended to fire upon them, the general and his staff drew their pistols and rode toward the citizens. A stampede, of course, ensued. As the last of the soldiers was leaving the northern end of the town, they set fire to a large frame warehouse then belonging to Messrs. Oaks & Linn, but it was speedily ,extinguished by the citizens in that vicinity. Thefiring of that warehouse, and the destruction of the Scotland railroad bridge, were the only acts of real destruction attempted. True, many horses, cattle, and other things were taken, but all was within the rules of war, except the carrying away of free negroes.\par 
\fs21 \f0 \pard \qj \fi210 \tx210 After Jenkins withdrew his force to the vicinity of Greencastle, he sent out foraging parties in all directione\par 
\page \lndscpsxn \fs21 \f0 \sect \sectd \linex0 \linemod0 \sbknone \lndscpsxn \pard \tx2011 \tqr \tx5594 in search of additional plunder. One detachment consist.\par 
\pard \tx2011 \tqr \tx5594 ing of About two hundred and fifty men under the com\-\par 
\pard \tx2011 \tqr \tx5594 mand of Colonel Ferguson crossed the Cove Mountain by\par 
\pard \tx2011 \tqr \tx5594 way of \_INfercersburg, reaching McConnellsburg, the county\par 
\pard \tx2011 \tqr \tx5594 seat of Fulton County, shortly after daylight on Thurs\-\par 
\pard \tx2011 \tqr \tx5594 day. This was the first appearance of the Confederates in\par 
\pard \tx2011 \tqr \tx5594 that place and the inhabitants were terribly alarmed as\par 
\pard \tx2011 \tqr \tx5594 they arose from t1leir beds to find the town in possession\par 
\pard \tx2011 \tqr \tx5594 of the dreaded enemy. A vigorous search was at once\par 
\pard \tx2011 \tqr \tx5594 instituted for horses, of which a large number was taken.\par 
\pard \tx2011 \tqr \tx5594 The stores and sbops were also visited, and although the\par 
\pard \tx2011 \tqr \tx5594 alarm had extended there and stocks were nearly all re\-\par 
\pard \tx2011 \tqr \tx5594 moved or concealed, a considerable arnount of valuable\par 
\pard \tx2011 \tqr \tx5594 Articles was taken. In some cases these were paid for in\par 
\pard \tx2011 \tqr \tx5594 Confederate scrip. The streets, after their departure, were\par 
\pard \tx2011 \tqr \tx5594 lined with old \'a7hoes, boots, and hats which had been\par 
\pard \tx2011 \tqr \tx5594 thrown aside for better ones. About one mile north of the\par 
\pard \tx2011 \tqr \tx5594 town a drove of fat cattle, valued at about six thousand\par 
\pard \tx2011 \tqr \tx5594 dollars, belOD\_Ding, to Ex \_Sheriff J. W. Taylor of this\par 
\pard \tx2011 \tqr \tx5594 place, was\tab These were taken, and together with\par 
\pard \tx2011 \tqr \tx5594 the horses which had been captured, were driven with\par 
\pard \tx2011 \tqr \tx5594 them and handed over to Rodes' infantry at Williamsport.\par 
\pard \tx2011 \tqr \tx5594 On the following Sunday this same body of the enemy\par 
\pard \tx2011 \tqr \tx5594 plundered the stores and shops of Greencastle. Had it\par 
\pard \tx2011 \tqr \tx5594 not been that the business inen there as elsewhere had\par 
\pard \tx2011 \tqr \tx5594 removed their stocks, the losses would have been much\par 
\pard \tx2011 \tqr \tx5594 \_reater. Another detachment was sent east, and after\par 
\fs6 \f1 \pard \tqr \tx409 1\_5\par 
\fs21 \f0 \pard \qj plundering the rich country about Waytiesborough, crossed the south\_eastern flank of the South Mountain, where, at the Monterey Pass, on Sunday, the 21st, the Philadel\-phia City troop and Bell's cavalry of Gettysburg, encoun\_\par 
\pard \par 
\fs21 \f0 \pard \qj tered their pickets. In the evening of the same day about one hundred and twenty of them entered Fairfield, and returned again by the Furnace road, taking with them all the good horses they could find.\par 
\fs21 \f0 \pard \qj \fi215 \tx215 From the time that these cavalrymen fell back from this place to below Greencastle \_Wednesday, the 17th \_until Monday morning, the 22d, the whole southern portion of Franklin county was plundered by these men, and the cap\-tures inade were transferred to Rodes' division at Wil\-liamsport. It would be difficult to estimate the: value of the property taken by this raid, but it certainly amounted to not less than one hundred thousand dollars. Then its coming in the season of the year when the farming inter\-ests required the use of the horses, and followed a few days afterward by Lee's vast army, which added vastly to the amount taken, increased immensely its inconvenience and loss. Many croppers who had little, else than their stock, were bankrupted. The effect of this raid, however, was to arouse the people of Pennsylvania and the whole North, and volunteers for the defense of \fs21 \f0 \b the border \fs21 \f0 \plain \fs21 \lang1033 hur\-ried to Harrisburg.\par 
\fs21 \f0 \pard \qj \fi215 \tx215 By Monday morning, the 22d, the various detachments of Jenkins' command had all rejoined the main body be\-tween Greencastle and \fs21 \f0 \b Hagerstown, where, on that \fs21 \f0 \plain \fs21 \lang1033 day, they were joined \fs21 \f0 \b by Rodes' division of infantry, wh~n the real invasion of \fs21 \f0 \plain \fs21 \lang1033 the \fs21 \f0 \b State was begun.\par 
\pard \tx215 \par 
\fs9 \f0 \plain \fs9 \lang1033 \pard \li1340 \tx1340 \tqr \tx1716 8\par 
\page \lndscpsxn \fs21 \f0 \sect \sectd \linex0 \linemod0 \sbknone \lndscpsxn \pard \fi220 \tx220 General Lee, as he sit on his borse that day in the pub\-lic square of Chanibersbur\_, looked every inch a soldier.\par 
\fs21 \f1 \fs21 \f0 \pard \tx3802 \tqr \tx5656 He was at that time \fs21 \f1 a\tab \fs21 \f0 ars of age, \fs21 \f0 \b stoutly\par 
\fs21 \f0 \plain \fs21 \lang1033 \fs21 \f0 \b \pard \qj \fi2115 \tx2115 bD:gt \fs21 \f0 \plain \fs21 \lang1033 fifty\_1 ye built, of medium height, hair strongly \_mixed with gray, and a rough, gray beard. Ile wore the usual Confederate gray, with some little ornamentation about the collar of his coat. His hat was a soft black without ornament other than a military cord around the crown. His whole ap\-pearance indicated dignity, composure, and disregard for the gaudy trappings of war and the honor attaching to his high station. Any one who had ever seen his picture, as it is found in the various histories of the war, would have bad no difficulty in singling him out in a crowd. General Lee seemed to have not only the most profound respect of his men\_officers and privates\_but their ad\-iniration and love. With some few exceptions among the officers, some of whom quietly expressed their feelings to Bome of our citizens, and seemed to fear that they had\par 
\page \lndscpsxn \fs22 \f0 \sect \sectd \linex0 \linemod0 \sbknone \lndscpsxn \pard \qj made \fs22 \f1 a \fs22 \f0 \b mistake in \fs22 \f0 \plain \fs22 \lang1033 coming into our State, the \fs22 \f0 \b whole army \fs22 \f0 \plain \fs22 \lang1033 had the most unbounded confidence in their commanding general, and would unhesitatingly follow him wherever he would lead them.\par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs22 \f0 \pard \qj \fi215 \tx215 The men composing the general's staff were a splendid looking body. Finely mounted, neatly dressed, and excel\-lent in horsemanship, they presented an appearance which those who witnessed them will be likely ever to remember.\par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs22 \f0 \pard \qj \fi215 \tx215 There were with the Confederates, presumably with that group, two officers of the British army and one of the Prussian. Those officers were, no doubt, expecting and desirlug to witness the downfall of the Republic. That such was the case with at least one . of them \_ Colonel Freemantle of the British service\_is demonstrated in an article he afterward wrote for \fs22 \f0 \i \_Blackwood's Magazine, \fs22 \f0 \plain \fs22 \lang1033 in which be narrates the events of the Pennsylvania cam\-paign. His abuse of the people of the border, and of the ladies of Chambersburg, whom lie calls I'viragoes," his congratulations to General Longstreet upon the apparent success of Pickett's great charge on the afternoon of the third day's battle, and his regret at their repulse, clearly show his hatred of our country and its institutions. We heard at the time of the presence of these foreign officers, but did not distinguisli them from others.\par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs22 \f0 \pard \qj \fi215 \tx215 In that group of distinguished men were the brains of the vast, moving host which came swarming through our borders, and while we were inclined to admire their genius, we yet looked upon them as the enemies of our country, and could only hope and pray that they would meet the terrible overthrow which they deserved. In precisely one week from the day of this imposing pageant, our hopes and\par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs22 \f0 \fs10 \f0 \i \pard \li3517 \tx3517 \tqr \tx3917 ZD\par 
\pard \tx3517 \tqr \tx3917 \par 
\fs7 \f0 \plain \fs7 \lang1033 \pard \li3962 \tx3962 \tx5335 \tqr \tx5636 V~11. \tab \fs16 \f0 tuu\par 
\fs7 \f0 \fs22 \f0 \pard \li53 \tx53 \tqr \tx5636 prayers were realized, and the defeated hosts were \fs22 \f0 \b thrown\par 
\pard \li53 \tx53 \tqr \tx5636 back \fs22 \f0 \plain \fs22 \lang1033 from the heights of Gettysburg, and with their\par 
\pard \li53 \tx53 \tqr \tx5636 crushing defeat commenced the decline and downfall of\par 
\pard \li53 \tx53 \tqr \tx5636 the cause for which they fought.\par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs22 \f0 \pard \qj \fi215 \tx215 General Lee selected for his head \_ quarters a grove which then stood along the pike leading to Gettysburg, near the eastern edge of Chambersburg. It was once known as \fs10 \f0 \i 11 \fs22 \f0 \plain \fs22 \lang1033 Shetter's Woods," but afterward as' \fs10 \f0 \i 11 \fs22 \f0 \plain \fs22 \lang1033 Messer\-smith's Woods," after the late George R. Messersmith, Esq., who at the time referred to owned it. It was for many years the place where picnics and Fourth of July celebrations were held. The Centennial Anniversary of American Independence, on July 4th, 1876, was held there. The grove has recently been cut down, and the place is now a cultivated field. It was a beautiful loca\-tion, and from Friday, June 26th, to Tuesday morning, 30th, General Lee and his staff tarried there. There he held his councils of war, there lie received reports from the various parts of his vast army, and there he planned and ordered an attack on the capital of our State, and there on the night of \_Monday, 29tb, when Longstreet's scout brought inforination of the where\-abouts of the Army of the Potoniac, he recalled that order and decided to cross the South Mountain and fight a battle \_upon the direct line to Baltimore and Washing\-ton. Other acts of iniportance which transpired upon this historic spot during those memorable four days of General Lee's residence there, will be \fs22 \f0 \b given \fs22 \f0 \plain \fs22 \lang1033 in their ap\-propriate places.\par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs22 \f0 \pard \qj \fi215 \tx215 In the morning of this day\_Friday, 26th,\_Early's di\-vision left its camp at Greenwood, where it had remained\par 
\page \lndscpsxn \fs22 \f0 \b \sect \sectd \linex0 \linemod0 \sbknone \lndscpsxn \pard \tqr \tx5717 over the \fs22 \f1 \plain \fs22 \f1 \lang1033 previous day, and proceeded by the pike to Get\_'\par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs22 \f1 \pard \qj tysburg on its way to York, according to instruction,\_`,, , , given General Early by General Ewell at the visit of the former to the latter's head \_quarters near Chambersburg the day before. While on their way across the mountain they'burned the Caledonia Iron Works, which belonged to Hon. Thaddeus Stevens. These works were situated about two miles east of Greenwood, at the base of the South Mountain, and al)out ten miles froin Chambers\-burg. They consisted of a large charcoal furnace, forge, rolling mill, coal house, shops, stables, and other build\-ings. On Tuesday, June 16th, as has been said, while Jenkins' cavalry occupied Chambersburg, a marauding party visited these works, and upon the condition that they should be spared, all the horses and mules belong\-ing to the premises were delivered to them. Hon. Joha Sweeney, Mr. Stevens' business mana(,cr, says that he had an interview with General Early, ,,s \fs15 \f0 110 \fs22 \f1 sat upon his horse that day, and endeavor(A to (lissuade hini from executing his threat to destroy these works. Ile told him that so far as Mr. Stevens was concerned, lie would be better off if his works had been destroyed ten years before, but for the sake of the many poor people who were dependent. upon them for support, and would be t1irown out of em\-ployment if they were destroyed, lie should spare them. To this appeal General Early replied, \fs10 \f0 11 \fs22 \f1 That is not the way Yankees do business. They do not go on unless they make money. Then, Mr. Stevens is an enemy of the South. Ile is in favor of confiscating their property and arm\-iDg the \_negroes. His property must be destroyed."' General Early then specially detailed Colonel French to,\par 
\pard \par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs22 \f1 \pard \qj apply the torch, and the whole was soon a mass of smoul\-dering ruins.*\par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs22 \f1 \pard \qj \fi205 \tx205 In the afternoon of this day Early's division reached Gettysburg, when a requisition was made upon the authori\-ties for sixty barrels of flour, seven thousand pounds of pork or bacon, one thousand two hundred pounds of sugar,. one hundred pounds of coffee, one thousand pounds salt, forty bushels onions, one thousand pairs shoes, five hundred bats; or, ten thousand dollars in money. To this demand the town council, through its president, Alr. D. Kendlebart, made the following reply:\par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs22 \f1 \fs15 \f0 \pard \tx3196 \tqr \tx5666 GENERAL EARLY:\tab GETTYSRURG, \fs15 \f0 June 26th, 1863.\par 
\pard \tx3196 \tqr \tx5666 \par 
\fs15 \f0 \pard \qj \fi139 \tx139 Sir\_The authorities of the borough. of Gettysburg, in answer to the de\-tuand made by you upon the said borough and county, say that their authority extends but to the borough, and that the requisition asked for can not be given, because it is utterly impossible to comply. The quantities required are far beyond that in our possession. In compliance, however, to the de\_\par 
\pard \tx139 \par 
\fs15 \f0 \pard \qj \fi264 \tx264 I am indebted to Professor J. Fraise Richard, the historian, for a copy of a letter from General Early to him, in response to an inquiry as to his reasons for destroying Mr. Stevens' iron works. General Early says in his letter from Lynchburg, Virginia, May 7th, 1886:\par 
\fs15 \f0 \pard \qj \fi139 \tx139 "No column of our troops was sent to burn the iron works of Thaddeus Stevens, near Greenwood, in the campaign into Pennsylvania, in 1863. My division of Ewell's corps was ordered to move along the western base of South Mountain until it came to the road from Chambersburg to Gettysburg, which I did, passing through Waynesborough and one or two smaller villages. I found the iron works above mentioned on the road aforesaid, where it be\-gins to ascend the South Mountain, and they were burned by my order, and on my own responsibility. My reasons for giving the order were founded on the fad that the Federal troops had invariably burned such works in the South, wherever they had penetrated, and notably among them the iron works of Hon. John Bell, of Tennessee, who was the Constitutional candi. date for the presidency in i86o, and who was too old to take any part in \fs15 \f0 \b the war then pending. \fs15 \f0 \plain \fs15 \lang1033 Moreover, in some speeches in congress, Mr. Stevens had exhibited a most vindi&ive spirit toward the people of the South, as he \fs15 \f0 \b continued to do to the \fs15 \f0 \plain \fs15 \lang1033 day of his death. This burning was simply in retalia\-tion for various deeds of barbarity perpetrated by Federal troops in \fs15 \f0 \b some of\par 
\fs15 \f0 \plain \fs15 \lang1033 \fs15 \f0 \b \pard \tqr \tx5664 the Southern States, \fs15 \f0 \plain \fs15 \lang1033 as was the subsequent burning of Chambersburg in 1864.\par 
\fs15 \f0 \fs15 \f0 \pard \li1367 \tx1367 \tx4353 \tqr \tx5691 " Respe&fully yours, etc.,\tab \fs15 \f0 J. A. EARLY."\par 
\page \lndscpsxn \fs21 \f0 \sect \sectd \linex0 \linemod0 \sbknone \lndscpsxn \pard \qj \fi223 \tx223 As previously 'stated, on the preceding (lay Heth's di. vision of Hill's corps passed through Chambersburg and on out east to Fayetteville, where it encamped. Follow\-in\_ this division during the afternoon of the same day and the forepart of the day following \_Saturday, the 27th, \_were Pender's and Anderson's divisions\_ Pender in ad\-Vance. Throughout the entire afternoon of the day, and until late in the evening, the three divisions of Longstreet's corps passed through and went on out the Harrisburg pike~ turning off at the Mennonite Church, where General Ewell had his 'head \_quarters a few days before, and went into camp along the east bank of the Conocoebeague Creek. Hood's division encamped on the farm of Mr. Peter Leb\-man, two and a half miles north \_east of Cliambersburg; Pickett's division upon Mr. John N. Loiilg's farm, and McLaws' still further up along, the creek.\par 
\fs21 \f0 \pard \qj \fi223 \tx223 On this day General Lee at his head \_ quarters near Chambersburg issued the following general order:\par 
\pard \tx223 \par 
\fs14 \f1 \pard \li58 \tx58 \tx1826 \tx2625 \tqr \tx5736 \tab HEAD \_PUARTFRs ARmy NoRTHERN VIRGINIA,\par 
\fs18 \f0 \i \pard \li58 \tx58 \tx1826 \tx2625 \tqr \tx5736 General Order, No. 73.\tab \fs14 \f1 \plain \fs14 \f1 \lang1033 CHAMBERSBURG, PA., \fs16 \f0 June 27th, 1863\_\par 
\pard \tx58 \tx1826 \tx2625 \tqr \tx5736 \par 
\fs16 \f0 \pard \li50 \fi175 \tx50 \tx225 The commanding general has observed with marked satisfa(aion the con\-du& of the troops on the march, and confidently anticipates results com\-mensurate with the high spirit they have manifested.\par 
\fs16 \f0 \pard \li50 \fi175 \tx50 \tx225 No troops could have displayed greater fortitude, or better performed their arduous matches of the past ten days.\par 
\fs16 \f0 \pard \li233 \tx233 Their condu& in other respefts has, with few exceptions, been in keep\_\par 
\pard \tx233 \par 
\fs16 \f0 \pard \qj \li204 \tx204 ing with their character as soldiers, and entitles them to approbation and praise.\par 
\fs16 \f0 \pard \qj \li587 \fi-397 \tx190 \tx587 thaTthere have, however, been instances of forgetfulness on the part of some hey have in keeping the yet unsullied reputation of this army, and thai the duties exacted of us by civilization and Christianity are not less obliga\-tory in the country of the enemy than in our own.\par 
\fs16 \f0 \pard \qj \li163 \fi141 \tx163 \tx304 The commanding general considers that no greater disgrace could befall the army, and through it, our whole pe~ple, than the perpetration of the barbarous outrages upon the unarmed and defenseless, and the wanton de\-stru<ftion of private property, that have marked the course of the enemy in our own country.\par 
\fs16 \f0 \pard \li295 \tx295 Such proceedings not only degrade the perpetrators and all conneded with\par 
\pard \tx295 \par 
\fs16 \f0 \pard \qj \li107 \tx107 them, but are subversive of the discipline and efficiency of the army, and destru&ive of the ends of our present movement.\par 
\fs16 \f0 \pard \qj \li133 \fi151 \tx133 \tx284 It must be remembered that we make war only upon armed men, and that we can not take vengeance for the wrongs our people have suffered without lowering ourselves in the eyes of all whose abhorrence has been excited by\par 
\pard \tx133 \tx284 \par 
\fs16 \f0 \pard \qj \li107 \tx107 the atrocities of our enemies, and offending against Him to whom vengeance belongetli, without whose favor and support our efforts must all prove in vaiti.\par 
\fs16 \f0 \pard \li233 \tx233 The commanding general, therefore, earnestly exhorts the troops to ab\_\par 
\pard \tx233 \par 
\fs16 \f0 \pard \li87 \tx87 \tx3946 \tqr \tx5750 stain, with most scrupulous care, from unnecessary or wanton injury to\par 
\pard \li87 \tx87 \tx3946 \tqr \tx5750 private property, and he enjoins upon all officers to arrest and bring to sum\-\par 
\pard \li87 \tx87 \tx3946 \tqr \tx5750 mary punishment all who shall in any \_way offend against orders on this sub\-\par 
\pard \li87 \tx87 \tx3946 \tqr \tx5750 je6t.\tab R. X \fs14 \f1 LEI:, \fs18 \f0 \i General.\par 
\pard \tx87 \tx3946 \tqr \tx5750 \par 
\fs21 \f0 \plain \fs21 \lang1033 \pard \qj \fi223 \tx223 This order, unlike the former one issued on the 21st, it will be seen, was written by General Lee himself, and not by his adjutant. The object of the former oi)(,, was, as has been stated, to prevent the indiscriminate plunder of our\par 
\pard \tx223 \par 
\fs21 \f0 \pard \qj people and to confine the demands of the army, and the methods to be employed in securing them, within the limits of civilized warfare. T\_Tnder the regulations pre\_\par 
\pard \par 
\fs21 \f0 \pard \qj scribed private property was to be respected, and in no case taken except when needed by the army, and then only by officers specially charged for that duty. Candor com\-pels me to say that in the main these humane regulations\par 
\page \lndscpsxn \fs22 \f0 \sect \sectd \linex0 \linemod0 \sbknone \lndscpsxn \pard \qj were observed. The taking of groceries, provisions, sta\-tionery, hardware, clothing, bats, boots and shoes, drugs, horses, cattle, corn, oats, bay, etc., was clearly within the rules of civilized warfare, and nothing more than the Federal army did when in the enciny's country. And bav\-ing been recognized as beliio\_crents in the exchange of pris\-oners, and in other ways, the Confederates had the right while in our country to thensages accorded to armies in an enemy's country. This,to their credit be it said, they ex\-acted of us without many acts of wanton and useless plun\-der. Indeed I must say that from all the conceptions I had formed from history of the desolation produced by an invading army\_in a civil war especially, which is usually attended with more rancor and bitterness than one be\-tween opposing nations\_this invasion of our State widely differed. With the exception of a few instances, where stragglers from the main line committed some depreda\-tions, private houses were not entered with hostile intent. But one person\_a Mr. Strite\_was killed. He resided a few miles south of Chambersburg, and soine distance from the main road over which the army passed. While standing in. his yard, in front of his house, three stragglers from Hill's corps came up to him and demanded his inoney, which he immediately gave them. Soon afterward two more stragglers came and made a similar demand, and having no more to give them, they 'killed him and con\-cealed his body under the manure in. the adjoining barn\-yard. In a few instances persons were relieved of watches, \fs22 \f1 \b pocket \_books, boots etc., \fs22 \f0 \plain \fs22 \lang1033 by strag ers, but never in the\par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs22 \f0 \pard \li3346 \tx3346 \tqr \tx3943 1191\par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs22 \f0 \pard \li129 \tx129 \tqr \tx5819 presence of an officer. But of all the adepts at \fs22 \f1 \b appropri\-\par 
\pard \li129 \tx129 \tqr \tx5819 ating \fs22 \f0 \plain \fs22 \lang1033 hats, some of these Confederate soldiers displayed an\par 
\pard \tx129 \tqr \tx5819 \par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs22 \f0 \pard \qj \li121 \tx121 ingenuity that was indeed remarkable. As they marched along the streets, sometimes close to the pavements, and in a few cases upon them because of the mud, those pos\-sessing bats having them crushed into a shapeless mass under their arms, it required but an instant to grab a bat from the wondering on\_looker and place it where itcould not be recognized by the owner. This was\par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs22 \f0 \fs15 \f0 \pard \li2257 \tx2257 \tqr \tx2652 n\par 
\fs22 \f0 \pard \qj \li121 \tx121 repeatedly done in the presence of officers, who invari\-ably tried to have the offending person pointed out, that the stolen property might be restored and the offender punished, but in the similarity of the men and the necessity for the column to keep moving on, not a single\_one was detected.\par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs22 \f0 \pard \qj \fi216 \tx216 But that the humane intentions of General Lee were not wholly regarded, and acts of plunder were committed, is clearly established by this second order from the corn\-mander in chief, in which he refers to some acts of diQ\-obedience and expresses his regret at the same. In further proof of this fact I introduce extracts from a report of the Pennsylvania campaign, written by Colonel Free\-mantle, one of the British officers who was with the Con\-federate army, and published in \fs22 \f0 \i Blackwood's Nagazine, of \fs22 \f0 \plain \fs22 \lang1033 September, 1863, Colonel Freemantle says: \fs11 \f0 11 \fs22 \f0 So com\-pletely was the country through which the Confederate army passed robbed and plundered, that all the cattle and farm horses having been sei%ed by General Ewell, farm labor had come to a complete standstill." In another place the same writer says: "Lee's retreat was encum\-bered by Ewell's immense train of plunder." Why it was that General Ewell's corps gained this distinction over the other two for its plundering propensities, may probably be\par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs22 \f0 \fs10 \f0 \pard \li643 \tx643 \tqr \tx1071 12\par 
\page \lndscpsxn \fs22 \f0 \sect \sectd \linex0 \linemod0 \sbknone \lndscpsxn \pard \qj \fi219 \tx219 I return now to the occurrences about Chambersburg. There were but few movements of troops through the streets this day (Sunday, 28th). The last of Hill's forces had passed through town the day previous, and were en\-camped about Fayetteville and Greenwood. Longstreet's corps was encamped a few miles north \_east of the town. Religious services were held in their camps, and the men were quietly resting from the fatigue of their weary march.\par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs22 \f0 \pard \qj \fi219 \tx219 Notwithstanding this quiet in the camps, however, im\-portant events, so far as the business men of the town were concerned, were transpiring. Squads of men, each in charge of one or more officers, visited the town and cleaned out the stores of what the troops which preceded them had left. Sitting in my house connected with \fs22 \f1 \b our store \fs22 \f0 \plain \fs22 \lang1033 about one o'clock \fs14 \f0 P. \fs22 \f0 m., the sound of an axe chopping somewhere about the front was heard. Repairing to the, place I found a party of soldiers chopping away the cellar door leading to where our groceries were kept, and after effecting an entrance, an officer with blank book and pencil noted down the contents. Having finished his inventory of our stock, a guard was placed over the same until it could be removed. This guard, after the departure of. the officer, ransacked our private or family cellar in the rear of the store cellar, and carried away whatever they could lay their thieving hands on. When the officer re\-turned to remove our groceries, I informed him of what the guard had done, at which he seemed to become very indignant, but one of the men showed him a can of pre, served fruit, and after a few whispered words between\par 
\page \lndscpsxn \fs21 \f0 \sect \sectd \linex0 \linemod0 \sbknone \lndscpsxn \pard \qj them., the can was placed in a wagon and the officer's wrath suddenly subsided. Similar scenes were at the same time being enacted all over the town, and scarcely a store or shop escaped. About four o'clock in the evening a number of teams were brought into town, and distributed around at various places, and the contents of every store, shop and cellar were taken and loaded into these wagons. The dry goods men at that time dealt also in groceries, and all suffered the loss of their entire stock. We had in our cellar a considerable amount of molasses, syrup, sugar, etc., which General Ewell had kindly spared us. These we would have removed with our stock of dry goods, but the cellar was deep and the hogsheads heavy, and we were unable to draw them out. The Confederate,;, however, were equal to the occasion, and when thirty or forty of thein took hold of the ropes, they soon had them all up in front of the store. When all were up, and before loading them into their wagons, an officer with a blank book noted down the number of gallons in each hogshead. and barrel, and also the amount of su'\_ar, etc. He seemed\par 
\fs9 \f1 \pard \li3676 \tx3676 \tqr \tx4081 In\par 
\pard \tx3676 \tqr \tx4081 \par 
\fs21 \f0 \pard \qj \li75 \tx75 to be acquainted with the business of handling groceries, a nd in deciphering the marks upon the vessels, and when fixing upon the number of gallons in. such as were tapped he would form his estimate after several liftings, which were always satisfactory to both sides in the transaction. In all this process be would have me by his side to see that be was acting fairly. Before giving the order to load into the wagon, lie directed me to select whieliever of the tapped vessels I wanted to retain for iny own use, and after designating one, he had the men put it back into the cellar. This was the largest sale of groceries we\par 
\pard \tx75 \par 
\fs15 \f0 \b \pard \li1129 \tx1129 \tx5266 \tqr \tx5737 LONGSTREET'S MEN IN CHAMBERSBURG.\tab \fs21 \f0 193\par 
\pard \tx1129 \tx5266 \tqr \tx5737 \par 
\fs21 \f0 \plain \fs21 \lang1033 \fs21 \f0 \b \pard \qj had ever \fs21 \f0 \plain \fs21 \lang1033 made in One day, and that was on the Sabbath too. Our loss Was heavy, but so was it with every other business establishment Of the town. This, be it remem\-bered, was but one of the instances in which we Were made to sufer by the enemy, and a year later, when McCausland's hand visited us nearl the wh I t\par 
\fs21 \f0 \pard \tqr \tx1633 laid in ashes. \_.\par 
\pard \tqr \tx1633 \par 
\fs21 \f0 \pard \fi845 \tx845 o e own was y\par 
\pard \tx845 \par 
\fs21 \f0 \pard \qj \li92 \fi227 \tx92 \tx319 I was not aware oil that day that a requisition had been made upon us. That one, however, was made, not upon the citizens, but upon the Borough officials, who failed to respond because they had left town, is evident in Colonel Freemantle's account of the transactions of that day, in \fs21 \f0 \i Blackivood's Xagazine. \fs21 \f0 \plain \fs21 \lang1033 Colonel Freemantle says:\par 
\fs21 \f0 \pard \qj \fi227 \tx227 "Major Moses tells me that his orders are to open the stores in Chambersburg by force, and seize all that is wanted for the army in a regular and official manner, giving in return its value in Confederate money or a re\-ceipt. The store \_ keepers have, doubtless, sent away their most valuable goods on the approach of the Confederate army. Much also has been already seized by Ewell, who passed through nearly a week ago. But Moses was much elated at having already discovered a large supply of ex\-cellent felt hats hidden away in a cellar, which he annexed at once."\par 
\pard \tx227 \par 
\fs21 \f0 \pard \qj \fi227 \tx227 The hats referred to were taken from one of the enter\-prising dealers, and Were valued at about two thousand dollars. That man h\par 
\fs21 \f0 \pard \tqr \tx1162 that day.\par 
\fs21 \f0 \pard \qj \fi227 \tx227 Colonel Freemantle continues: "Moses \fs21 \f0 \b proceeded into town \fs21 \f0 \plain \fs21 \lang1033 at eleven o'clock \fs15 \f0 A. M. \fs21 \f0 with an official \fs21 \f0 \b requisition (frorn \fs21 \f0 \plain \fs21 \lang1033 General Longstreet), for three days' rations \fs21 \f0 \b for the \fs15 \f0 13\par 
\pard \tx227 \par 
\fs11 \f0 \fs15 \f0 \pard \li662 \tx662 \tqr \tx2243 0111 \fs11 \f0 11is \fs21 \f0 \plain \fs21 \lang1033 loss on\par 
\fs9 \f1 \pard \tqr \tx573 I.V\par 
\page \lndscpsxn \fs22 \f0 \sect \sectd \linex0 \linemod0 \sbknone \lndscpsxn \pard \tx1830 \tqr \tx3875 194\fs16 \f0 \b \tab THE GREAT INVASION.\par 
\pard \tx1830 \tqr \tx3875 \par 
\fs22 \f0 \plain \fs22 \lang1033 \pard \qj whole army in this nei.\_Ilborhood. These rations he is to seize by force, if not voluntarily supplied. * * Neither the mayor nor the corporation officers were to be found anywhere, nor were the keys of the principal stores fortbcomiiig until Moses began to apply the axe. * * I returned to the camp at six o'clock \fs16 \f0 P. \fs22 \f0 m. Major Moses did not get back till very late, much depressed at the ill success of his mission. Ile had searched all day most idefatigably, and bad endured much contumely from the Union ladies, who called him \fs18 \f0 \i a \fs22 \f0 \plain \fs22 \lang1033 thievish, little rebel scoundrel, ' and other opprobious epithets. But this did not annoy him so much as the mauner in which everything he wanted bad been sent away or hidden in private houses, which he is not allowed by General Lee's order to search. He has only managed to secure a quantity of molasses, sugar, and whisky."\par 
\pard \par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs22 \f0 \pard \qj \li135 \fi225 \tx135 \tx360 That molasses was taken from us; the whisky from the building adjoining.\par 
\pard \tx135 \tx360 \par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs22 \f0 \pard \qj \li135 \fi225 \tx135 \tx360 The following day 'Major Moses, commissary\_ general of Longstreet's corps, rode around to each place plundered and paid for the things taken. When he came to settle with me, be drew from his pocket a book in which the articles were carefully noted down. Taking his seat at my desk he wrote in a hurried and business \_like manner an itemized bill. Ile then asked me the price at which we sold each article, which be scrutinized for awhile and then set down what hethoughtwas, right. FootiDgupthewhole lie paid me in Confederate scrip. While writing so burriedly I said to him, \fs10 \f1 11 \fs22 \f0 Why, major, you write just like a Philadelphia lawyer." "Tllat's just what I am," he replied. \fs10 \f1 11 \fs22 \f0 1 studied law on Walnut Street, Philadelphia, but\par 
\pard \tx135 \tx360 \par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs22 \f0 \fs16 \f0 \b \pard \li1455 \tx1455 \tx5610 \tqr \tx6020 LONGSTREET'S MEN IN 011AMBERSBURG.\fs22 \f0 \tab 19\par 
\pard \tx1455 \tx5610 \tqr \tx6020 \par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs22 \f0 \pard \li315 \tx315 \tqr \tx6020 some years ago I \fs22 \f0 \plain \fs22 \lang1033 removed South, where I have resided\par 
\pard \tx315 \tqr \tx6020 \par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs22 \f0 \pard \li330 \tx330 \tqr \tx6020 \_Ievsearidintoe.h"inaA, fltleNrow, major, tell me what to do with \par 
\pard \li330 \tx330 \tqr \tx6020 this\par 
\pard \tx330 \tqr \tx6020 \par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs22 \f0 \pard \li2160 \tx2160 \tqr \tx6020 receiving \fs18 \f0 \i MY \fs22 \f0 \plain \fs22 \lang1033 pay in his worthless scrip,\par 
\pard \tx2160 \tqr \tx6020 \par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs22 \f0 \fs18 \f0 \i \pard \li330 \tx330 \tqr \tx6020 money! \fs22 \f0 \plain \fs22 \lang1033 Straightening himself up and listening to what\par 
\pard \tx330 \tqr \tx6020 \par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs22 \f0 \fs10 \f1 \pard \li2505 \tx2505 \tqr \tx2930 0\par 
\pard \tx2505 \tqr \tx2930 \par 
\fs22 \f0 \pard \li315 \tx315 \tqr \tx6020 1 said, he replied, , Well, now, that is an important ques\-\par 
\pard \tx315 \tqr \tx6020 \par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs22 \f0 \fs14 \f0 \pard \li4200 \tx4200 \tqr \tx4610 n\par 
\pard \tx4200 \tqr \tx4610 \par 
\fs22 \f0 \pard \qj \li225 \tx225 tion, and deserves the best answer I can crive. My advice to you is to invest this money in Confederate bonds. They are at least as good as the money, and if our cause sue.ceeds, as we expect it will, the bonds will be paid. If we fail, then of course our bonds will be worthless, but so will\par 
\pard \tx225 \par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs22 \f0 \pard \qj \li225 \tx225 yours, for your government will be bankrupt by that time." The reader may, perhaps, be curious to know whether I took the \fs12 \f0 MZjOr'S \fs22 \f0 advice, or what I did with my\par 
\pard \tx225 \par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs22 \f0 \fs10 \f1 \pard \qj \li150 \tx150 "I \fs22 \f0 money." It will be recollected that when telling of the shrewdness of Rev. Dr. Fisher in disposing of the scrip ,given him for printing done for the Confederates, I stated\par 
\pard \tx150 \par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs22 \f0 \pard \qj \li135 \tx135 that the doctor did the best in his dealings with the Confederates of any man I knew, with one exception, alld that was a preacher also. The present is perhaps the time to tell of that incident. Shortly after the retreat of the Confederates from our State, an elderly gentle. man came into our store and, after purchasing a few'\par 
\pard \tx135 \par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs22 \f0 \pard \qj things, took me aside and proposed to leave a deposit of \_a considerable sum of Greenbacks, for the purpose of buying up all the Confederate scrip I could get. He did not inform me what he wanted it for, nor where he lived,\par 
\pard \par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs22 \f0 \pard \qj but I learned afterward. lie instructed me to pay from \_four to five cents on the dollar, and because of my consenting to rid our county of this worthless trash, with which it was flooded and which was considered of no value,, lie allowed me six cents on the dollar for mine. Major\par 
\pard \par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs22 \f0 \pard \tqr \tx6065 \par 
\page \lndscpsxn \fs22 \f0 \sect \sectd \linex0 \linemod0 \sbknone \lndscpsxn \pard \tx1830 \tqr \tx4005 V6\fs16 \f0 \tab THE GREAT INVASION\par 
\pard \tx1830 \tqr \tx4005 \par 
\fs12 \f1 \pard \tqr \tx5565 \tqr \tx5775 \tab Its \fs22 \f0 per gallon for molasses and\par 
\pard \tqr \tx5565 \tqr \tx5775 Moses allowed us fifty cel\tab (I us just\par 
\pard \tqr \tx5565 \tqr \tx5775 syrup. Six cents on the dollar for our scrip nette\par 
\pard \tqr \tx5565 \tqr \tx5775 \tab hat not lon\_ after we could have\par 
\pard \tqr \tx5565 \tqr \tx5775 \par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs22 \f0 \fs22 \f0 \i \pard \tqr \tx5580 \tqr \tx5760 three cents per gallon \fs22 \f0 \plain \fs22 \lang1033 for w Zn\tab have\par 
\pard \tqr \tx5580 \tqr \tx5760 o\_otten one dollar per gallon for. The reader can\par 
\pard \tqr \tx5580 \tqr \tx5760 \tab some idea of the profit or loss of that clay's transactiong\par 
\pard \tqr \tx5580 \tqr \tx5760 \tab when in addition to our whole stock of sugar and other\par 
\pard \tqr \tx5580 \tqr \tx5760 \tab groceries, eight hundred gallons of molasses and syrup\par 
\pard \tqr \tx5580 \tqr \tx5760 were taken\_ \tab s to know what the Confederates\par 
\pard \tqr \tx5580 \tqr \tx5760 \par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs22 \f0 \pard \li270 \tx270 \tx4905 \tqr \tx5790 I'\tab is ques\-\par 
\pard \tx270 \tx4905 \tqr \tx5790 \par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs22 \f0 \pard \qj \fi300 \tx300 .have often felt anxiOu did with our molasses. Perhaps the solution of th tion is given by General imboden \fs24 \f0 in \fs22 \f0 an article contributed by him to the Galaxy of November, 1871. Speaking of General Lee's great simplicity, and sharing the lot of his soldiers, General Imboden says: 11 On one occasion some molasses was obtained and sent to the \_field. One of General Lee's staff, who was caterer that week\_that is, he drew the rations for the bead \_ quarters mess \_set a small pitcher of molasses before the general at dinner, who was delighted to eat it with his hot corn bread. Seeing his satisfaction the catering colonel remarked, 'General, I secured five gallons for head\_quarters.' 'Was there as\par 
\pard \tx300 \par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs22 \f0 \pard \li120 \tx120 \tx2370 \tx4170 \tqr \tx5790 \tab e size of ours\tab O\_fi, no, the sup\-\par 
\pard \li120 \tx120 \tx2370 \tx4170 \tqr \tx5790 much for every mess th\par 
\pard \tx120 \tx2370 \tx4170 \tqr \tx5790 \par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs22 \f0 \pard \qj \li120 \tx120 ply won't last a week.' I Then, I direct, colonel, that you immediately return every drop you have, and send an order that no molasses shall be issued to officers or men except the sick in hospital.' )I\par 
\pard \tx120 \par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs22 \f0 \pard \qj \li150 \fi195 \tx150 \tx345 In a few weeks my strange friend called again, and taking what scrip I had procured, left another deposit. This he~.continued until he had gotten about all that could be had. But who was the strange man who was dealing in Confederate money? The following was his history as I\par 
\pard \tx150 \tx345 \par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs22 \f0 \fs16 \f0 \pard A MINISTER'S FPNANCIURP~0.\par 
\pard \par 
\fs22 \f0 \pard \tqr \tx495 I C 7\par 
\pard \tqr \tx495 \par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs22 \f0 \pard \qj \li60 \tx60 iXterward learned it: He was a Presbyterian minlster, and resided somewhere in the valley of Vir,\_hiia,aiid being an uncompromising Union man be thundered the terrors of the law upon the beads of his Confederate congregation until they locked the church against him. When the Confederates advanced near where lie lived he would flee north across the Potomac, and when the Union forces would occupy the territory he would return, and, surrounded by a guard of Union soldiers, would open his church and preach again. Three of his neighbors desiring to sell their property and move further down in the Confederacy, he bought their farms, payable in \fs22 \f0 \i currency, \fs22 \f0 \plain \fs22 \lang1033 and would thus follow the wake of the Confederate army and buy up their scrip and pay it over for the farms. He was .a sharp financier, and what became of him and how he made out with his purchases I never beard.\par 
\pard \tx60 \par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs22 \f0 \pard \qj \fi210 \tx210 While the scene of plunder just related was taking place in Cliambersburg the following interesting incident took place at General Lee's head \_quarters; and as the sequel of it is so interesting, I will allow the principal actor therein to relate her own story. The person referred to is Mrs. Ellen \_NIcLellan, widow of a former citizen of Chambersburg, William McLellan, Esq.:\par 
\pard \tx210 \par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs22 \f0 \fs16 \f0 \pard \tqr \tx1365 MR. J. HoxR:\par 
\pard \tqr \tx1365 \par 
\fs16 \f0 \i \pard \qj \fi150 \tx150 Dear Sir \_I \fs16 \f0 \plain \fs16 \lang1033 take pleasure in complying with your request, and will give you a brief account of my interview with General Lee, as nearly as I can recolle& it now. The mills, provisions, and stores throughout the town and Surrounding country were all in the hands of the enemy, and in many families supplies were running short. On the Sunday before the battle of Gettysburg (June 28th), matters had become so serious that it became necessary for some one to seek an interview with the enemy and obtain flour. I sent for one of the body\_guards, and a captain came in response. From him I learned that I could see General Lee by going to his head \_ quarters in Messersmithlo\par 
\lndscpsxn \fs16 \f0 \sect \sectd \linex0 \linemod0 \sbkpage \lndscpsxn \pghsxn12240 \pgwsxn20160 \marglsxn1080 \margrsxn1080 \pard \li1842 \tx1842 THE GREAT INVASION.\par 
\pard \tx1842 \par 
\fs16 \f0 \pard \tx566 \tx1046 \tx1943 \tx3383 \tx4012 \tx4689 \tqr \tx5602 .ods. This captain offered me an escort, but assured me that I could go\-\par 
\pard \tx566 \tx1046 \tx1943 \tx3383 \tx4012 \tx4689 \tqr \tx5602 III\tab ith\tab fe & fe\tab h i\tab f G\tab IL '\tab d th t\par 
\pard \tx566 \tx1046 \tx1943 \tx3383 \tx4012 \tx4689 \tqr \tx5602 \par 
\fs16 \f0 \pard \qj \fi133 \tx133 one w per sa ty, s ow ng me a copy o enera eesorer a any one who would insult a woman byword, look, or a(ft, would be instantly shot. I then decided to decline an escort, and taking my young daughter I set out for the camp. I found the rules were stringently enforced, but had no diffi\-culty in passing through the ranks. Everything was in most perfe(a order; even the horses were picketed so as to do no injury to the trees in the grove where their tents were pitched. Reaching head\_quarters I found the General st\_ated with his officers at the table. A subordinate met me and learning my errand placed two camp\_stools, and in a short time I found myself seated by General Lee himself. I stated to him our need, and told him starvation. would soon be at hand upon many families unless he gave us aid, Ile seemed startled by this announcement, and said that such destitution seemed itnpos\-sible in such a rich and beautiful grain \_growing country, pointing to the\-rich fields of grain all around his camp. I reminded him that this growing\-grain was useless to us now, and that many of our people had no means to, lay in supplies ahead. Ile then assured me that he had turned over the sup\-plies of food he found, to his men to keep them from ravaging our homes,. Ile said, " God help you \fs7 \f1 iff \fs16 \f0 I permitted them to enter your houses. Your supplies depend upcn the amount that is sent in to my men." He then told' me to send one or two of our prominent men to him. I replied that they had nearly all gone away, fearing that they would be seized and taken off. (I feared to give him the names of any of our gentlemen.) He then asked me to send a mMer who could give him an idea of the quantity required. On leaving I asked for his autograph. He replied: " Do yon want the auto\-graph of a rebel? " I said, " General Lee, I am a true Union woman, an& yet I ask for bread and your autograph." The general replied, "It is to~ your interest to be for the Union, and I hope you may be as finu in yout\-principles as I am in mine." He assured me that his autograph would be a\-dangerous thing to possess, but at length he gave ;c to me. Changing the topic of conversation, he assured me the war was a cruel thing, and that he\-only desired. that they would let him go home and eat his bread there in peace. All t1ais time I was impressed with the strength and sadness of the man.\par 
\fs16 \f0 \pard \qj \fi133 \tx133 I trust these few faLqs may prove of use to you. I am glad to see that you are getting up these bits of unwritten history. Of course I have just given you an outline of the affair and you are at liberty to use it as you see fit.\par 
\fs16 \f0 \fs13 \f0 \pard \li3599 \tx3599 MRS. \fs16 \f0 ELLEN McLELLAN.\par 
\pard \tx3599 \par 
\fs21 \f0 \pard \li262 \tx262 \tqr \tx5680 The sequel to this visit of Mrs. McLellan \fs21 \f0 \b will \fs21 \f0 \plain \fs21 \lang1033 appeaf\par 
\pard \tx262 \tqr \tx5680 \par 
\fs21 \f0 \pard \tqr \tx182 i\par 
\pard \tqr \tx182 \par 
\fs16 \f0 \pard MRS. M'LELLAN'S VISIT TO LEE.\par 
\pard \par 
\fs21 \f0 \pard \tqr \tx502 199\par 
\pard \tqr \tx502 \par 
\fs21 \f0 \pard \qj \li87 \tx87 in the following \fs27 \f0 fact. \fs21 \f0 Judge Kinimell says that on th same day of Mrs. McLellan's visit to General Lee's bead quarters, or the day following, be can not now say which an officer of General Lee's staff came to his residence anc rapped at his door. Upon open \fs16 \f0 1 \fs21 \f0 tig the door the office said, "Are you Judge Kimmell? " Replying in the af\-firniative, the officer banded him a paper, saying, \fs9 \f0 11 \fs21 \f0 General Lee solids you this." The Judge says that it bad become known to some that he was engaged in sending informa\-tion of the Confederates to the authorities at Harrisburg, and knowing that his life would be forfeited if found out, lie tliought as the officer handed him the paper from General Lee that "the very mischief was to pay." His fears, however, quickly subsided when he read the paper\par 
\pard \tx87 \par 
\fs21 \f0 \pard \qj \li66 \tx66 and found that it was an or~er from General Lee on the guard at 8touffer's mill for a number of barrels of flour\par 
\pard \tx66 \par 
\fs21 \f0 \pard \qj \li66 \tx66 for the poor of the town. Before he could use the order, General Lee had left and it was of no assistance.\par 
\fs21 \f0 \pard \qj \fi223 \tx223 In the evening of this day \_ Sunday, 28th \_ the camp hres of the advance of Heth's division, which bad marched from its camp about Fayetteville on that day, were seen from Gettysburg on the eastern slope of the mountain above Cashtown.\par 
\fs21 \f0 \pard \qj \fi223 \tx223 31\_onday, 29. Oil this day Jenkins' cavalry moved from. their encampment one mile east of Mechanicsburg toward.\par 
\pard \tx223 \par 
\fs21 \f0 \pard \qj Shiremanstown and also toward Bridgeport on the bank of the Susquehanna by the Harrisburg pike. When ap\-proacbing Oyster's Point \_a place on the turnpike about equally distant between Mechanicsburg and Brid\_eport \_they came in conflict with a force of infantry sent \fs21 \f0 \b forward by General Couch. The brief \fs21 \f0 \plain \fs21 \lang1033 skirmish which ensued\par 
\lndscpsxn \fs15 \f0 \sect \sectd \linex0 \linemod0 \sbkpage \lndscpsxn \pard MR. J. \fs13 \f1 HoxH:\par 
\fs16 \f0 \pard \qj \fi138 \tx138 Sir\_On Monday, June 29th, 1863, 1 visited General Lee at his head\-quarters, near Chambersburg, for the purpose of having a blind mare, the property of one of my neighbors, excmpted~ from capture. All of the othex available horses having been either captured or removed to safe quarters, I wanted to have the use of this one for the purpose ot having my corn plowed. After having stated to the general the obje& of my visit, and while the pappr was being prepared according to his order, I employed my time in watching the features and movements of the great commander. Never have I seen so much emotion depi(aed upon a human countenance. With his hand at times clutching his hair, and with contra&ed brow, he would walk with rapid strides for a few rods and then, as if he bethought himself of his adtions, he would with a sudden jerk produce an entirexhange in his features and de. meanor and cast an inquiring gaze on me, only to be followed in a moment by the same contortions of face and agitation of person. The order for the safety of the horse having been finished and given me, I left and made rapid strides toward town, only to find fhatthe Medical Purveyor ofihe Confederate Army had taken the horse, and my corn, which badly needed working, had to do without it and take its chance along with hundreds of acres within the\par 
\fs16 \f0 \fs16 \f0 \pard \tx4042 \tqr \tx5585 county in the same condition.\tab \fs16 \f0 J. L. SUESSEROTT.\par 
}